♪ [theme]
>> Charlsie: This is
Marketplace.
Putting your favourite fast food
chicken sandwich to the test.
How much of it
is really chicken?
>> They've restructured it
and kind of reformed it.
>> Not all of the samples that
you've had in front of you are
100 per cent chicken.
>> Wow.
>> You're kidding!
>> Charlsie: And what's the fast
food industry feeding us?
>> Compared to the home cooked
chicken, the fast food chicken
has between seven to ten times
the amount of sodium.
>> Charlsie: Get ready for the
ultimate chicken challenge.
On your marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Charlsie: We're testing
chicken from popular
fast food chains.
Can I have one of those grilled
chicken sandwiches, please.
Not the deep-fried stuff,
the grilled no-batter stuff.
Is it 100% chicken?
>> Yes.
>> Charlsie: Check out the pitch
from all the big brands.
Surely if you're thinking it's
all natural and all just
chicken, but is it?
♪ ♪
To find out,
we turned to science.
♪ ♪
Matt Harnden is a technician
at Trent University.
His labs tested meat
samples for industry
and government.
How?
Analyzing DNA
>> Hi, Matt.
>> Hi.
>> Which is why we're here.
♪ ♪
>> Will a DNA test tell us
how much chicken is
actually in the chicken?
>> It'll give you a rough
estimate of a ratio.
>> It will give us
a rough estimate.
>> Between chicken DNA
and a plant DNA,
if there's plants.
>> Charlsie: DNA tests won't
give us an exact percentage
of the amount of chicken
in the whole piece of chicken,
but Matt says it's
a good indicator.
This idea then,
that if you're not getting
100 per cent chicken DNA,
does that mean that you're not
getting 100 per cent
actual chicken meat?
>> Yeah, exactly.
So there'd be a legitimate
chicken in there mixed together
with some plant filler.
♪ ♪
>> Yup.
If there's something else in
there, besides chicken,
the DNA test will find it.
♪ ♪
Matt and his team get to work.
The samples we're testing,
grilled chicken breasts,
grilled strips,
and this oven roasted chicken.
While we wait for
the lab results...
♪ ♪
Back at CBC,
we're setting up
a another test.
A taste test.
♪ ♪
It's a chicken challenge.
We're bringing in taste testers
to judge this chicken.
Let's meet them.
♪ ♪
>> Lunch time, baby.
Let's go.
>> Charlsie: Will Mahood is
serious about Subway.
>> ..cucumbers and black olives.
It's pretty well
always chicken,
it's a little leaner, less fat,
no sugar in it.
You're getting a little better
quality than say, you know,
a typical fast food
chain like McDonald's.
>> Charlsie: Will trusts he's
getting the real deal chicken.
I expect that it's going to be
100 per cent chicken breast.
And that's lunch, folks.
♪ ♪
>> Where do you
guys want to eat?
>> McDonald's!
>> Charlsie: Fast food gives
this busy mom a break.
>> They have the grilled
chicken burgers.
>> Charlsie: Rose Heron feels
better about chicken.
>> Worker: Chicken wrap?
>> Yes, grilled chicken.
>> Charlsie: And so does
her son, Daniel.
>> I think the chicken burger is
a healthier option, not as much
sodium and all that
bad stuff in it.
>> Rose: If we're going
to eat fast food,
better that we eat
chicken, right?
♪ ♪
>> I'm ready for a snack.
>> Charlsie: Irena Valenta likes
to treat herself.
Her go-to:
Wendy's.
>> Can I have
the grilled chicken sandwich.
Do you know if
it's frozen or fresh.
>> It's fresh.
>> Charlsie: Irena has high
blood pressure,
so she's careful.
>> I'm watching salt,
the fat content.
Hmm.
That's good.
♪ ♪
>> Sample A.
>> Charlsie: Our taste test is
about to get started.
>> Sample C.
♪ ♪
Sample F.
Our judges are standing by
outside our studio.
♪ ♪
>> Houston, we have lift-off.
>> Charlsie: Here to
spice things up
Toronto chef, Rod Bowers.
>> Welcome to our test kitchen.
>> Thank you.
>> Charlsie: And to fill us in
on the nutrition facts,
registered dietician,
Christy Brissette.
>> Rod, we're also going to have
you put a little twist into
this competition.
What we want you to do is
cook off some chicken.
We're going to see if our
testers can spot
the home-cooked chicken
from the fast food chicken.
>> I got to bring my gourmet.
>> A-game.
>> Let's do it,
let's make it happen.
♪ ♪
>> I'm going to put a little bit
of love in here.
And it's very simple.
It's just, you know what,
it's actually
just some dried herbs
and a little bit of salt.
That's all you need, right?
>> Well take a look at
your competition here.
These are our samples.
>> I think I am well out in
front of this chicken game.
>> Charlsie: To keep this taste
test blind and unbiased,
we're stripping it down.
Only we know
the brands behind the buns.
Well, all of our samples have
been undressed, but there's
still one plate,
that's looking
for a little love.
>> Da,da,duh.
Duh, duh, duuuuh.
I'm ready, come on.
>> Bring it on.
♪ ♪
>> Alright, final sample is in.
You guys ready
to meet the testers?
>> Let's do it.
>> Bring 'em on.
>> Alright, taste testers,
come on down!
♪ ♪
Charlsie: Rose, Daniel,
Will, and Irena.
All fast foodies, about to
find out what they're in for.
>> Welcome, welcome.
You guys are here for
the chicken taste
test challenge.
Are you guys up for
the challenge?
>> Yeah.
>> Let's eat some chicken.
♪ ♪
>> Yeah.
>> Charlsie: We start
♪ ♪
with sample A.
>> Charlsie: We start
Rose, there you are.
with sample A.
A&W
Rose, there you are.
Dig right in.
A&W
♪ ♪
Dig right in.
>> Tender.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: Tender. yeah.
>> Tender.
>> Better than I thought.
>> Charlsie: Tender. yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Better than I thought.
>> Mine was more rubbery.
>> Yeah.
>> I found it a lot rubbery.
>> Mine was more rubbery.
>> You find it rubbery?
>> I found it a lot rubbery.
>> Yes, mine's dry.
>> You find it rubbery?
♪ ♪
>> Yes, mine's dry.
>> There you are, sir.
♪ ♪
>> Thank you.
>> There you are, sir.
>> Charlsie: Next up, McDonalds.
>> Thank you.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: Next up, McDonalds.
>> This one was juicier.
♪ ♪
>> I find mine a bit stringy.
>> This one was juicier.
>> Stringy, okay.
>> I find mine a bit stringy.
>> Yeah, I'd agree with that.
>> Stringy, okay.
>> Seemed to be juicier.
>> Yeah, I'd agree with that.
>> Charlsie: Here comes Subway's
>> Seemed to be juicier.
first sample.
>> Charlsie: Here comes Subway's
>> What's that?
first sample.
>> Irena's face is priceless.
>> What's that?
>> What's got you there , Irena?
>> Irena's face is priceless.
What are you thinking?
>> What's got you there , Irena?
>> Is it real?
What are you thinking?
>> Charlsie: Is it real, okay.
>> Is it real?
>> It looks like the grill marks
>> Charlsie: Is it real, okay.
are there just to make it look
>> It looks like the grill marks
like it was grilled.
are there just to make it look
>> Yes.
like it was grilled.
>> Charlsie: Hmmmm, we'll get
>> Yes.
to the bottom of those
>> Charlsie: Hmmmm, we'll get
grill marks later.
to the bottom of those
♪ ♪
grill marks later.
>> Very salty.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: Salty?
>> Very salty.
Let's see about
>> Charlsie: Salty?
the next Subway item.
Let's see about
>> Now, sample D is actually -
the next Subway item.
one of our first chicken strips
>> Now, sample D is actually -
that we're gonna take a look at.
one of our first chicken strips
>> The pieces I have look real.
that we're gonna take a look at.
Like everything there,
>> The pieces I have look real.
a good chicken.
Like everything there,
♪ ♪
a good chicken.
>> This is the first one that
♪ ♪
tasted a little more seasoned.
>> This is the first one that
The other's have
tasted a little more seasoned.
been a lot plainer.
The other's have
>> For me it tasted like
been a lot plainer.
more flavour than
>> For me it tasted like
it did actual chicken.
more flavour than
>> It's artificial,
it did actual chicken.
it's not chicken to me.
>> It's artificial,
I think a bit too
it's not chicken to me.
much salt for me.
I think a bit too
>> Charlsie: What will they say
much salt for me.
about Tim Hortons?
>> Charlsie: What will they say
>> Uhmmm.
about Tim Hortons?
I'll try it.
>> Uhmmm.
♪ ♪
I'll try it.
>> It tasted more like chicken
♪ ♪
because of the stringy-ness.
>> It tasted more like chicken
>> Charlsie: And Will, what did
because of the stringy-ness.
you think about this one?
>> Charlsie: And Will, what did
>> I didn't taste real at all.
you think about this one?
>> I found it very rubbery.
>> I didn't taste real at all.
>> Like, I didn't taste any
>> I found it very rubbery.
real chicken at all in it.
>> Like, I didn't taste any
>> As I was chewing it,
real chicken at all in it.
I wasn't sure
>> As I was chewing it,
that it was chicken.
I wasn't sure
♪ ♪
that it was chicken.
>> Charlsie: Tough crowd.
♪ ♪
Look out, Chef Rod.
>> Charlsie: Tough crowd.
>> We're gonna start clucking.
Look out, Chef Rod.
>> Charlsie: But right now,
>> We're gonna start clucking.
here's Wendy's.
>> Charlsie: But right now,
♪ ♪
here's Wendy's.
>> It's good.
♪ ♪
>> I love the flavour.
>> It's good.
>> That "je ne sais quoi."
>> I love the flavour.
[laughing]
>> That "je ne sais quoi."
>> I think this is very good.
[laughing]
>> Mmhm.
>> I think this is very good.
>> I felt that I tasted lemon.
>> Mmhm.
>> Didn't love the taste,
>> I felt that I tasted lemon.
per say, tasted
>> Didn't love the taste,
almost like sanitized.
per say, tasted
>> Even thought I didn't find
almost like sanitized.
the flavour that good,
>> Even thought I didn't find
it tasted like it's more real
the flavour that good,
and not too artificial.
it tasted like it's more real
Because when things
and not too artificial.
are artificial they taste a lot
Because when things
better than if they're real.
are artificial they taste a lot
[laughing]
better than if they're real.
>> Oh dear.
[laughing]
Charlsie: Oh dear is right.
>> Oh dear.
What will Daniel think about
Charlsie: Oh dear is right.
the chef's home cooked chicken?
What will Daniel think about
>> Here we go, sample G.
the chef's home cooked chicken?
♪ ♪
>> Here we go, sample G.
>> These grill marks
♪ ♪
look possibly real.
>> These grill marks
♪ ♪
look possibly real.
>> Charlsie: Will our top chef
♪ ♪
get top marks?
>> Charlsie: Will our top chef
♪ ♪
get top marks?
>> It was juicy.
♪ ♪
>> I love
>> It was juicy.
the natural flavouring.
>> I love
>> I found mine a little tough
the natural flavouring.
at first to cut, I think.
>> I found mine a little tough
With that being said though,
at first to cut, I think.
it tasted real.
With that being said though,
>> I found it a bit salty.
it tasted real.
>> Salty, okay.
>> I found it a bit salty.
Yeah, and Rose?
>> Salty, okay.
>> Very comparable to the one
Yeah, and Rose?
previous, either one of those
>> Very comparable to the one
I think is good choices.
previous, either one of those
>> Charlsie: Now that you've
I think is good choices.
tasted these seven pieces.
>> Charlsie: Now that you've
Did anybody have
tasted these seven pieces.
a particular favourite?
>> Toss between F and G.
>> G tasted the realest.
>> My favourite was G, even
though it was a bit more salty.
>> I'm gonna go with F,
even though G was close.
>> Charlsie: That's two-to-one
for Chef.
Irena has the deciding vote.
Will it be Chef or Wendy's?
>> I change my mind, G.
>> Charlsie: G was
your favourite, okay.
>> It's juicy, it's thin
and it's flavourful
>> So, we do have
a little secret.
So one of our samples was
actually prepared by Chef Rod.
Does anyone want
to guess which one it was?
>> I think we gotta go with G
>> You're all gonna go with G
and you were able to
spot the home cooked chicken.
Nice job, Chef.
And now the least favourite?
>> C visually looks fabricated.
I wouldn't touch it.
>> Okay.
She was scared at the beginning.
I saw her face.
>> Charlsie: Will, was there
one that you just did not enjoy.
>> C, I'd have to agree with.
It just...
>> Charlsie: Rose and Daniel
agree too.
>> It just tasted real off
and it didn't really even have
much flavour at all
>> Charlsie: Subway takes a big
hit on this chicken challenge
and it's not over yet.
Which one of these pieces of
chicken had the least amount of
chicken in it?
>> We expected 100% chicken.
>> Charlsie: The lab
results are in.
>> Misleading.
You got a company that's branded
itself a healthy alternative.
>> Charlsie: This is your
marketplace.
Which chain do you think uses
the least amount of chicken?
Send me a tweet @CBCharlsie.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: Fast food chicken,
coming right at you.
♪ ♪
We're testing popular fast food
chicken sandwiches.
Looks like chicken.
>> It's not chicken to me.
>> Charlsie: Sort of tastes
like chicken,
according to our judges.
>> I found it very rubbery.
>> Charlsie: So everyone's
wondering, how much chicken is
really in your chicken?
♪ ♪
Remember, that's the meat
mystery we asked this DNA lab
to solve.
>> So take a small
biopsy punch of it.
>> Charlsie: Trent University's
lab has been testing
and retesting our
samples for months.
We have results.
>> Yes.
>> They're in.
What did you find
in our chicken test?
>> Most of the samples came back
very close to
100 per cent chicken.
>> Charlsie: Except for two.
♪ ♪
>> We have some more
news for you.
So it turns out that not all of
the samples that you've had in
front of you are
100 per cent chicken.
>> What kind of filler?
>> Yeah, what else would it be?
>> What else would it be,
that's a great question.
Any guesses, everybody, as to
which of one these
pieces of chicken,
had the least amount
of chicken in it?
>> I'm going C.
>> C.
>> Charlsie: C?
>> Oh, yes, big time.
>> Charlsie: Are they right?
Hmm, not quite, but close.
Sample D.
Our DNA test shows it could
be less than 50% chicken.
>> You're --
>> Wow.
>> You're kidding.
>> Charlsie: And sample C...
Well our DNA test shows it's
only slightly
more than 50 per cent chicken.
And who makes both C and D?
Subway chicken.
>> Oh, my goodness.
>> Wow.
>> Whoa, yikes, eat fresh.
>> Healthy choice?
>> That's misrepresentation.
>> We expected
100 per cent chicken.
>> Charlsie: Subway's chicken
samples have the least
amount of chicken DNA,
and the most
amount of fillers compared to
the others.
>> You're getting these
inexpensive fillers that aren't
as nutritious for you.
>> Previously I would have said
oh, great Subway, that's a
pretty good choice, you don't
feel as bad, but not anywhere.
>> Misleading.
You've got a company that's
branded itself as
the healthy alternative.
>> Charlsie: So what does
the sandwich giant have to say?
For months we've been asking
Subway questions
about their chicken.
We sent them our DNA results.
Got no clear answers.
We asked for an on-camera
interview, they declined.
Now they question our science,
but say they're concerned and
they're checking with suppliers
to make sure their chicken meets
their standards.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: But we still
have questions.
So we tracked down a food
scientist who
knows the industry.
Hi, Ben.
>> Hello.
>> Thanks for having me.
At the University of Guelph,
Ben Boyer specializes in
processed meats.
So these are samples,
do you want to take a look?
>> Yes.
>> Charlsie: He's filling us in
on how he thinks
fast food chicken strips
could be made.
>> This is likely a restructured
type of product potentially.
>> Charlsie: Restructured means
binding pieces of meat together
and then forming
it into one piece.
They stick them together
>> They use some
non-meat ingredients,
to add value
to those products.
>> Okay.
Add value,
translation: Costs less.
And what are those
non-meat ingredients?
♪ ♪
We got them, straight from
the company web sites.
We put them together
in one long list,
in no particular order.
♪ ♪
We share it with
our fast foodies.
They expected just chicken, but
our DNA tests shows Subway
could only be half that.
>> I don't know what
most things are.
>> Wow.
>> It's almost like a chemistry
class not a cooking class.
>> Charlsie: Dietician
Christy Brissette
is not so surprised.
>> Many of the ingredients were
refined starches or different
names for sugar.
Lots of different names for
types of sodium and different
salt combinations.
>> Charlsie: But Ben says
according to Health Canada
they're all safe and approved.
>> A lot of these, to be honest,
you could find in your kitchen
as well.
>> Sodium phosphate I do not
have in my kitchen cupboard.
>> Yup.
>> What does that do?
>> It's particularly important
if you're going to freeze some
of these products.
>> Charlsie: It helps the
chicken retain water,
keeps it juicy.
>> Boyer: There's very
tight regulations
with sodium phosphate.
>> Why?
>> That's to make sure
that it's a wholesome
and safe product.
>> Okay, is there a danger
with sodium phosphate?
>> No, certainly no more danger
than any other type of salt.
>> Charlsie: Well, Christy's
not so certain.
>> I think these are going to be
the trans fats of the future.
The research has shown us so far
that when you have higher levels
of these phosphates
in your blood,
you're at a higher risk of
cardiac disease, kidney issues.
They are included in amounts
that are approved by Health
Canada, that are determined to
be safe, but we don't know the
long-term impacts of them on our
bodies and on our health.
>> We'll go with sodium
phosphate next.
>> Charlsie: Sodium phosphates
are used in all the recipes,
except for Wendy's.
>> And we're going to be mixing
this together, and you can kind
of see we're already starting to
kind of form a --
>> It's like getting gel-like.
>> Charlsie: And something that
Subway adds that
the other samples don't.
Soya protein, why would you need
to put more protein
in a chicken product?
>> A lot of great binding
capabilities, potentially
improved texture.
Those type of things.
And in some sense, it also makes
the product slightly
more cost effective.
>> Okay. So cheaper?
>> Yes, exactly.
>> Okay.
Remember, our DNA test shows
Subway's strips and oven roasted
chicken could be
only about 50 per cent chicken.
And guess what?
The rest,
mostly soy.
>> So it's very likely they're
probably making more of a
product that contains this
ground chicken and forming it
into a patty.
>> Charlsie: Yup. Ben thinks
ground chicken breast meat is
formed to look like this.
Let's just flip this over.
>> Flip it over and we'll see
these grill marks here.
>> Charlsie: Okay.
Surely the food scientist knows
about those grill marks.
What do these things tell you?
>> There's probably some sort of
oven or grill type of system,
that they run a lot of these
sandwiches through and get a
very consistent grill mark
design on these.
>> Charlsie: But even
he's not sure.
So after some digging, we think
we've solved
the grill mark secrets.
According to a former employee
at a processing plant, these
grill marks are actually seared
on to the patty after it's
already cooked.
And, they're pretty much
just for show.
>> Charlsie: The chicken
challenge continues.
>> From a sodium perspective you
might as well eat a big portion
of poutine.
>> Charlsie: Wow.
Nutrition shakedown.
This is your marketplace.
Get marketplace
in your inbox once a week.
Sign up for our news
letter at cbc.ca/marketplace.
♪ ♪
>> Charlsie: The ultimate
chicken challenge.
♪ ♪
Our grilled chicken sandwich
test isn't over yet.
To find out how the nutrition
shakes down, we send more
samples to a different lab.
How does the fast food compare
to home cooked chicken?
Nutritionist and registered
dietician Christy Brissette
analyzes the results, and gives
us the low down.
>> How many grams of
carbohydrate, do you think
are in our home cooked chicken?
>> Zero.
>> Zero, right, chicken is a
protein.
Many of the ingredients were
refined starches or different
names for sugar, that are being
added to your chicken.
Chicken breasts should not have
any carbohydrate in it
whatsoever,
and it's not the type
of carbohydrates that we want.
>> Charlsie: Now, you probably
do want protein,
but fast food chicken,
a quarter less
than home cooked.
>> And when we looked at the
sodium amount, that completely
blew my mind, compared to the
home cooked chicken,
the fast food chicken had
between seven to ten times
the amount of sodium.
>> Charlsie: And get this,
Subway's oven roasted has the
most sodium, but the least,
Subway strips.
>> When you're eating the entire
sandwich, two-thirds of your
daily limit of salt.
So from a sodium perspective,
you might as well eat a big
portion of poutine.
>> Wow.
>> The message is that those
companies are portraying, it
sounds like you're taking it
straight from a farm
and it's just a
fresh piece of meat.
No manufacturing process to it,
then it shows up on a sandwich.
>> They put this health halo
over these chicken sandwiches
where they seem virtuous, seem
angelic and people think they're
doing themselves a favour,
making a healthier choice.
They're not the pure, virtuous
chicken that's coming from the
farm to your plate.
>> Charlsie: Last question, does
anybody feel like chicken
tonight?
[ laughter ]
>> Maybe --
>> If we cook it.
>> Charlsie: If you
cook it, okay.
Will eating chicken
ever be the same?
Next week on marketplace,
how not to get ripped off.
Who's in charge of that hidden
tourist fee?
>> It is a mandatory fee
for this location.
>> It's sneaky, it's shady,
it's deceiving.
>> We've been under
cover twice now,
it's gotten worse.
Some businesses have
hiked the fees.
>> Charlsie: Don't fall for it.
And busting sky-high hospital
TV charges.
>> Why they charge
$17 a day for a TV
that you plug in a cable
and away you go.
>> Charlsie: Another tax
on the sick?
♪
[
th
em
e]